Textbook of English for Grade  PoorviPoorvi Prelims.indd  -Dec- :: PM Reprint - First Edition June  Jyaishtha  Reprinted March  Phalguna  PD 1500T HK  National Council of Educational Research and Training,   .00ALL RIGHTS RESERVED  No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system or transmitted, in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording or otherwise without the prior permission of the publisher.  This book is sold subject to the condition that it shall not, by wa y of trade, be lent, re-sold, hired out or otherwise disposed of without the publishers consent, in any form of binding or cover other than that in which it is published.  The correct price of this publication is the price printed on this page, An y revised price indicated by a rubber stamp or by a sticker or by any other means is incorrect and should be unacceptable. Publication Team Head, Publication : M.V. Srinivasan Division Chief Editor : Bijnan Sutar Chief Production : Jahan Lal Officer (In charge)Chief Business : Amitabh Kumar ManagerAssistant Production : Sayuraj A.R. Officer Cover, Illustr ations and Layout Blue Fish Designs Pvt. Ltd.OFFICES OF THE PUBLICATION DIVISION, NCERT NCERT Campus Sri Aurobindo MargNew Delhi   Phone : - ,  Feet Road Hosdakere Halli Extension Banashankari III StageBengaluru   Phone : - Navjivan Trust BuildingP.O.Navjivan Ahmedabad   Phone : - CWC CampusOpp. Dhankal Bus StopPanihatiKolkata   Phone : - CWC Complex Maligaon Guwahati   Phone : -   P oorvi Textbook of English for Grade 6ISBN ---- Printed on  GSM paper with NCERT watermark Published at the Publication Division by the Secretary, National Council of Educational Research and Training, Sri Aurobindo Marg, New Delhi   and printed at D.P. Printing  Binding, B-, Okhla-I, A-, New Delhi110020 Prelims.indd  -Mar- :: AM Reprint - iiiForeword The National Education Policy  envisages a system of education in the country that is rooted in Indian ethos and its civilisational accomplishments in all domains of human endeavour and knowledge, while at the same time preparing the students to constructively engage with the prospects and challenges of the 21st century. The basis for this aspirational vision has been well laid out by the National Curriculum Framework for School Education (NCF-SE)  across curricular areas at all stages. Having nurtured the students inherent abilities touching upon all the five planes of human existence, the pañchakośhas, in the Foundational and the Preparatory Stages have paved the way for the progression of their learning further at the Middle Stage. Thus, the Middle Stage acts as a bridge between the Preparatory and the Secondary Stages, spanning three years from Grade  to Grade . The NCF-SE , at the Middle Stage, aims to equip students with the skills that are needed to grow, as they advance in their lives. It endeavours to enhance their analytical, descriptive and narrative capabilities and to prepare them for the challenges and opportunities that await them. A diverse curriculum, covering nine subjects ranging from three languagesincluding at least two languages native to Indiato Science, Mathematics, Social Sciences, Art Education, Physical Education and Well-being, and Vocational Education promotes their holistic development. Such a transformative learning culture requires certain essential conditions. One of them is to have appropriate textbooks in different curricular areas as these textbooks will play a central role in mediating between content and pedagogya role that will strike a judicious balance between direct instruction and opportunities for exploration and inquiry. Among the other conditions, classroom arrangement and teacher preparation are crucial to establish conceptual connections both within and across curricular areas. The National Council of Educational Research and Training, on its part, is committed to providing students with such high-quality textbooks. Prelims.indd  -Dec- :: PM Reprint - ivivVarious Curricular Area Groups, which have been constituted for this purpose, comprising notable subject-experts, pedagogues and practising teachers as their members, have made all possible efforts to develop such textbooks. Poorvi , the English language textbook for Grade  is one of these. Its content comprises stories, poems and narratives that ensure a reflection of their social, cultural and geographical landscapes wherein they are sure to find traces of their lived experiences. Poorvi also weaves into its contents snippets from the vast treasure trove of Indian Knowledge Systems, Indias artistic and cultural heritage, and embeds values alongside ecological sensitivity, gender equality, digital skills, etc. For all practical purposes, it has, to my mind, succeeded in its curricular goals: first, to foster natural curiosity among students through a proper selection of content, and second, develop among them the core competencies in listening, speaking, reading and writing by intelligently designing various activities around them, thereby seamlessly integrating vocabulary and grammar within meaningful contexts. However, in addition to this textbook, students at this stage should also be encouraged to explore various other learning resources. School libraries play a crucial role in making such resources available. Besides, the role of parents and teachers will also be invaluable in guiding and encouraging students to do so. With this, I express my gratitude to all those who have been involved in the development of this textbook, and hope that it will meet the expectations of all stakeholders. At the same time, I also invite suggestions and feedback from all its users for further improvement in the coming years. Dinesh PrasaD saklani Director New Delhi National Council of Educational  May  Research and Training Prelims.indd  -Dec- :: PM Reprint - About the book Poorvi, a textbook of English for Grade  is developed in alignment with the vision of the National Education Policy (NEP)  and the National Curriculum Framework for School Education (NCF-SE) . Language education is essential for effective communication, aesthetic expression and appreciation. Reasoning and critical thinking are very closely linked with language use, and these are valuable capacities to be developed. Language development plays an important role in the development of perceptual and practical concepts, and also enables us to check our experiences with others to ensure that we have a shared meaning emerging from these experiences. The textual material developed for the Middle Stage will take children well beyond the Preparatory Stage. Curricular Goals, competencies, and learning outcomes have been the guiding principles while developing the textbook. The Curricular Goals (CG) cover a range of competencies. CG-: Student develops independent reading comprehension and summarising skills of a variety of texts (stories, poems, extracts of plays, essays, articles and news reports). CG-: Attains the ability to write about thoughts, feelings and experiences of social events. CG-: Develops the capacity for effective communication using language skills for questioning, describing, analysing and responding. CG-: Explores different literary devices and forms of literature.CG-: Develops the ability to recognise basic linguistic aspects (word and sentence structure) and use them in oral and written expression. CG-: Develops appreciation the distinctive features of the language, including its alphabet and script, sounds, rhymes, puns, and other wordplays and games unique to the language. C-.: Understands the phonetics and script of the language, the number of vowels and consonants, and how they interact and are used. C-.: Engages in the use of puns, rhymes, alliteration, and other wordplays in the language to make speech and writing more interesting and enjoyable. Prelims.indd  -Mar- :: PM Reprint - C-.: Becomes familiar with some of the major word games in the language (e.g., palindromes, spoonerisms, sentences without given letters or sounds, riddles, jokes, Antakshari, anagrams, crosswords, etc.) The Curricular Goals have been covered through a variety of themes and an array of activities. There are five thematic units that comprise stories, poems, conversation, narrative and descriptive pieces. Themes such as friendship, wellness, sports, nature, art and culture, etc. have been included. Cross-cutting themes, such as Indian Knowledge Systems, values, heritage, gender sensitivity and inclusion have been integrated in all the units. Each unit has three literary pieces story, poem, conversation, or non-fiction. There are intext questions, Let us discuss to assess comprehension of the text. The end-of-the-text questions given in Let us think and reflect are designed to encourage critical thinking, reasoning, responding, analysing, etc. Unit  Fables and Folk Tales offers timeless wisdom through engaging narratives that resonate with young minds. It includes a classic fable as well as a folk tale from Tamil Nadu. The story, A Bottle of Dew shows that true success comes from hard work and diligence. This story encourages students to value perseverance as a pathway to success. The poem, The Raven and the Fox is a fable told in poetic form where students learn about the futility of vanity and flattery. Rama to the Rescue is a graphic story that demonstrates the value of presence of mind in overcoming challenges. Unit  Friendship will help students comprehend the meaning of real friendship and that friendship has a huge impact on ones well-being. The story The Unlikely Best Friends is a narrative of a unique friendship that blossoms between Gajaraj, the elephant and Buntee, the dog. This story highlights the importance of empathy and how true friendship can bring joy and fulfillment, even in unexpected circumstances. A Friends Prayer is a poem that reflects the significance of nurturing friendships. The Chair is a story in which a grandfather helps Mario, his grandson, to distinguish between real and superficial friends. Unit  Nurturing Nature is about the relationship between nature and human beings. The idea that nature has healing powers is inculcated among learners through the selected narratives. This unit encourages students vi Prelims.indd  -Mar- :: AM Reprint - curiosity to explore the world around them. Neem Baba, is a conversation between Amber and the grand old neem tree. Through the conversation, the students learn about the numerous benefits of the neem tree found in almost all parts of our country. The poem, What a Bird Thought, is an empathetic journey that the students partake when they see the world through the eyes of a little bird. Spices that Heal Us is a letter from a grandmother about spices that are used at home and have natural healing and recovery processes. This unit upholds the rich knowledge of the herbs and spices, which has been handed down over generations. Unit  Sports and Wellness invites students to explore the multifaceted world of physical activity, mental health and holistic well-being. This unit aims to cultivate not only physical fitness but also emotional intelligence, self-awareness and a positive mindset, equipping students with essential skills for navigating the complexities of the new era with confidence and vitality. The story, Change of Heart highlights the value of sportsmanship, fair play and enjoying the game regardless of winning or losing. The poem, The Winner captures the joy and excitement of childhood games, emphasising the thrill of outdoor play. YogaA Way of Life is about maintaining a healthy lifestyle, well-being and discipline. Knowing about the WHO mYoga app also empowers the children to explore yoga in a fun and accessible way, developing physical fitness, mental clarity and emotional resilience in the formative years. Unit  Culture and Tradition aims to reawaken the spirit of Ek Bharat, Shreshtha Bharat among the students. It also celebrates the indomitable and unwavering creative spirit of our country. Kalakritiyon ka Bharat, enables the students to be aware about the rich heritage of craftwork. Presented in the form of narratives of children from different parts of India, it promotes appreciation of various art forms. The poem, The Kites is an autobiographical account of a kite and its invincible spirit. Ila Sachani: Embroidering Dreams with her Feet is a tribute to the persistence of a young girl. The story on Ila Sachani with special needs introduces the learners with traditional embroidery highlighting the fact that one can overcome challenges and can achieve success beyond limits. The real-life narrative is evidence of how challenges vii Prelims.indd  -Mar- :: PM Reprint - can be turned into opportunities with focus, hard work, positivity and never giving up. The poem, National War Memorial, is to recite and appreciate the spirit behind it. These literary pieces are not only entertaining but also instill valuable life lessons, fostering personal growth and helping children navigate social situations with confidence. The selected pieces will resonate with childrens daily experiences and encourage positive values like resilience, empathy and emotional intelligence that can have a profound impact on their development. The focus of the book is developing competencies of listening, speaking, reading and writing while developing vocabulary and grammar in context. Language learning becomes meaningful when connected to the immediate environment of learners and they express their thoughts, feelings, experiences through experiential learning. All the activities are colour coded under the headingsLet us discuss, Let us think and reflect, Let us speak, Let us listen, Let us learn, Let us write and Let us explore. Transcripts for Let us listen are given at the end of each unit. Students can listen to the audio provided in the QR code for each unit. In-text activities and exercises at the end of each chapter are engagingthey promote joyful learning along with assessment as and for learning. Illustrations have been designed depicting the context to enhance learning. We sincerely hope that the students will enjoy doing these activities, and that these will help develop the desired and intended language competencies. Kirti Kapur Professor and Member Convener Curricular Area Group: Languages (English) NCERT, New Delhi viii Prelims.indd  -Mar- :: PM Reprint - ixNAtioNAl SyllAbuS ANd teAchiNg leArNiNg MAteriAl coMMittee (NStc) . M. C. Pant, Chancellor , National Institute of Educational Planning and Administr ation (NIEPA); Chairperson, NSTC . Manjul Bhargava, Professor, Princeton University; Co-Chairperson, NSTC . Sudha Murty, Acclaimed Writer and Educationist . Bibek Debroy , Chairperson, Economic Advisory Council to the Prime Minister (EACPM) . Shekhar Mande, F ormer Director General, CSIR; Distinguished Professor, Savitribai Phule Pune University, Pune . Sujatha Ramdorai, Professor , University of British Columbia, Canada . Shankar Mahadevan, Music Maestro, Mumbai . U. Vimal Kumar, Director, Prakash Padukone Badminton Academy, Bengaluru . Michel Danino, Visiting Professor, IIT  Gandhinagar . Surina Rajan, IAS (Retd.), Haryana, F ormer Director General, HIPA . Chamu Krishna Shastri, Chairperson , Bharatiya Bhasha Samiti, Ministry of Education . Sanjeev Sanyal, Member , Economic Advisory Council to the Prime Minister (EACPM) . M. D. Srinivas, Chairperson, Centre for Policy Studies, Chennai . Gajanan Londhe, Head, Progr amme Office, NSTC . Rabin Chhetri, Director, SCER T, Sikkim . Pratyusha K umar Mandal, Professor, Department of Education in Social Sciences, NCERT, New Delhi . Dinesh Kumar, Professor and Head, Planning and Monitoring Division, NCERT, New Delhi . Kirti Kapur, Professor, Department of Education in Languages, NCER T, New Delhi . Ranjana Arora, Professor and Head, Department of Curriculum Studies and Development, NCERT; Member-Secretary, NSTC Prelims.indd  -Dec- :: PM Reprint - xtextbook develoPMeNt teAM Guidance Mahesh Chandra Pant, Chairperson, NSTC and Member, Overall Coordination and Oversight in Curricular Area Group (CAG): Languages Manjul Bhargava, Co-Chairperson, NSTC and Member, Overall Coordination and Oversight in Curricular Area Group (CAG): Languages Curricular Area Group: Languages (English Sub-Group) Chairperson G. Rajagopal, Professor (Retired), EFL University, Hyderabad ContributorsAnju Gandhi, Academic Consultant, Sri Sri Ravi Shankar Vidya Mandir Trust, Bengaluru Arun Kumar Behera, Associate Professor, Sri Sathya Sai Institute of Higher Learning, Bengaluru Gurrapu Damodar, Professor and Vice Chancellor, Chaitanya (Deemed to be University), Warangal Girish Nair, Senior Member, Samvit Research Foundation, Bengaluru Karthika V. K., Assistant Professor, NIT, TrichyKishore Kumar Rudrurkar, Professor, Department of ESL Studies, EFLU, HyderabadKusha Tiwari, Professor, Department of English, Shyamlal College, University of Delhi, Delhi Meenakshi Khar, Associate Professor, Department of Education in Languages, NCERT, New Delhi Nidhi Tiwari, Professor, Department of Education in Social Sciences and Humanities, RIE, NCERT, BhopalNishi Pandey, Professor, Department of English and Modern European Languages, University of Lucknow, Lucknow Prelims.indd  -Dec- :: PM Reprint - xiParthasarathy Mishra, Professor, Azim Premji University, Bengaluru R. Meganathan, Professor, Department of Education in Languages, NCERT, New Delhi Rachana Chattopadhyay, PGT English, Cambridge School Srinivaspuri, New DelhiRuchi Sengar, CBSE Subject Expert; ELT Consultant , New Delhi Saket Bahuguna, Assistant Professor, Central Institute of Hindi-Delhi Centre, New DelhiSaryug Yadav, Professor, Department of Education in Languages, NCERT, New DelhiSuganya J., HoD, English, Bala Vidya Mandir Senior Secondary School, Adyar, Chennai Susmita Roy Choudhury, Dean Academics, G. D. Goenka Public School, Jammu Vandana Lunyal, Director, Regional Institute of English, ChandigarhVarada Nikalje, Professor, Department of Elementary Education, NCERT, New DelhiVedasharan Mallemari, Professor, EFLU, Hyderabad Reviewers Anurag Behar, CEO, Azim Premji Foundation; Member, National Curriculum Framework Oversight Committee Mira Bhargava, Professor Emeritus, Hofstra University, New York, USA Member ConvenerKirti Kapur, Professor, Department of Education in Languages, NCERT, New Delhi xi Prelims.indd  -Dec- :: PM Reprint - Prelims.indd  -Mar- :: PM Reprint - xiiiAcknowledgements The National Council of Educational Research and Training (NCERT) acknowledges the guidance and support of the esteemed Chairperson and members of the Curricular Area Group (CAG): Languages and other concerned CAGs for their guidelines on cross-cutting themes in developing this textbook. The Council is grateful for permission to reproduce copyright material in this book and would like to thank Sudha Murty for the story, A Bottle of Dew from The Magic Drum and Other Favourite Stories which was first published by Penguin Random House India; National Book Trust for an extract from Neem Baba (adapted) by S. I. Farooqi; Amar Chitra Katha for the graphic story Rama to the Rescue; and Kathakids.com for The Unlikely Best Friends. The copyright has been applied for and we would like to thank Jill Wolf for A Friends Prayer; Georgia Heard for The Winner; and Daphne Lister for The Kites. We acknowledge the portal freestoriesforkids.com for the story, The Chair (adapted) and the story Change of Heart (adapted). The Council acknowledges Jyoti Kohli, Professor, M. V. College of Education, University of Delhi, and Shreya Taneja, PGT English, Mata Jai Kaur Public School, Delhi for their valuable inputs. We are also grateful to Md. Faruq Ansari, Professor and Head, Department of Education in Languages, for providing academic and administrative support. The Council acknowledges and appreciates the contributions made by Monika Dohare, Senior Research Assistant; Asma Rafiq, Junior Project Fellow; Deepa Dubey, Junior Project Fellow ; Manusmriti, Junior Project Fellow and Abhishek Kumar, Junior Project Fellow from the Department of Education in Languages, NCERT for providing support in the development of the textbook. Special thanks are also due to the Publication Division, NCERT for their support. NCERT gratefully acknowledges the contributions made by Alpana Saha, Assistant Editor (Contractual); Fatma Nasir, Artist; Pawan Kumar Barriar, Incharge, DTP Cell, Publication Division; Mohan Singh, and Rajshree Saini, DTP Operators (Contractual) and Deepti Garg, Proofreader (Contractual). Prelims.indd  -Mar- :: PM Reprint - xivCopyright has been applied for all the texts and the publisher extends apologies for any omissions and would be glad to hear from any such unacknowledged copyright holders. xivPoorvi The textbook of English for Grade  is titled Poorvi after the Indian rāga Poorvi. This rāga is said to promote harmony and serenity. It is associated with dusk, specifically sunset time (Sandhi Prakash). Each rāga in Indian music carries its own emotional significance and is symbolically connected to certain seasons, times of day, and moods. Rāgas are believed to evoke specific emotions in listeners. Poorvi is an ancient and traditional Hindustani classical rāga that originated in eastern India. It is typically performed during the fourth prahar of the day, between  p.m. and  p.m. It evokes a sense of calmness and contemplation in the journey of learners, symbolising a harmonious blend of traditional and modern learning. Prelims.indd  -Dec- :: PM Reprint - xvcoNteNtS Foreword iii About the Book v Unit : Fables and F olk Tales A Bottle of Dew  The Raven and the Fox  Rama to the Rescue  Unit : Friendship The Unlikely Best Friends  A Friends Pra yer  The Chair  Unit : Nurturing Nature Neem Baba  What a Bird Thought  Spices that Heal Us  Unit : Sports and Wellness Change of Heart  The Winner  YogaA Wa y of Life  Unit : Culture and Tradition Hamara BharatIncredible India!  The Kites  Ila Sachani: Embroidering Dreams with her Feet  National War Memorial  Prelims.indd  -Dec- :: PM Reprint - Prelims.indd  -Dec- :: PM Reprint -